---
layout: post
title:  "(Un)Free Will"
subtitle: "A Resolution"
author: "Nick Landolfi"
date: 2014-10-03 02:00:00
categories: lando
---

An Analysis
-----------

First, an excerpt from Nietzsche's _Beyond Good and Evil_ [^1].

> Chapter 1.21: The _causa sui_ is the best self-contradiction that has yet been conceived, it is a sort of logical violation and unnaturalness; but the extravagant pride of man has managed to entangle itself profoundly and frightfully with this very folly. The desire for "freedom of will" in the superlative, metaphysical sense, such as still holds sway, unfortunately, in the minds of the half-educated, the desire to bear the entire and ultimate responsibility for one's actions oneself, and to absolve God, the world, ancestors, chance, and society therefrom, involves nothing less than to be precisely this _causa sui_, and, with more than Munchausen daring, to pull oneself up into existence by the hair, out of the slough of nothingness. If any one should find out in this manner the crass stupidity of the celebrated conception of "free will" and put it out of his head altogether, I beg of him to carry his "enlightenment" a step further, and also put out of his head the contrary of this monstrous conception of "free will": I mean "non-free will," which is tantamount to a misuse of cause and effect. One should not wrongly materialise "cause" and "effect," as the natural philosophers do (and whoever like them naturalize in thinking at present), according to the prevailing mechanical doltishness which makes the cause press and push until it "effects" its end; one should use "cause" and "effect" only as pure CONCEPTIONS, that is to say, as conventional fictions for the purpose of designation and mutual understanding,—NOT for explanation. In "being-in-itself" there is nothing of "casual-connection," of "necessity," or of "psychological non-freedom"; there the effect does NOT follow the cause, there "law" does not obtain. It is WE alone who have devised cause, sequence, reciprocity, relativity, constraint, number, law, freedom, motive, and purpose; and when we interpret and intermix this symbol-world, as "being-in-itself," with things, we act once more as we have always acted— _mythologically_. The "non-free will" is mythology; in real life it is only a question of _strong_ and _weak_ wills. It is almost always a symptom of what is lacking in himself, when a thinker, in every "causal-connection" and "psychological necessity," manifests something of compulsion, indigence, obsequiousness, oppression, and non-freedom; it is suspicious to have such feelings—the person betrays himself. And in general, if I have observed correctly, the "non-freedom of the will" is regarded as a problem from two entirely opposite standpoints, but always in a profoundly _personal_ manner: some will not give up their "responsibility," their belief in _themselves_, the personal right to _their_ merits, at any price (the vain races belong to this class); others on the contrary, do not wish to be answerable for anything, or blamed for anything, and owing to an inward self-contempt, seek to GET OUT OF THE BUSINESS, no matter how. The latter, when they write books, are in the habit at present of taking the side of criminals; a sort of socialistic sympathy is their favourite disguise. And as a matter of fact, the fatalism of the weak-willed embellishes itself surprisingly when it can pose as "la religion de la souffrance humaine"; that is ITS "good taste."

Nietzsche derides the pretensions of free will and faults the weakness that a belief in “unfree will” reveals. He attacks the axioms of volition, arguing that humanity contrives free will from the conventional fictions of cause and effect. Nietzsche dismisses free and unfree will as concepts without a basis of merit. He characterizes a freedom of will - or lack thereof - as a “rape and perversion of logic.” Nietzsche fundamentally rejects that the concepts of cause and effect can be used to explain. He views cause and effect as derivatives of humanity’s search for purpose and meaning. Waxing Platonic, Nietzsche invokes the image of a “symbol world,” an imperfect reflection of true existence “in itself.”  An attempt to derive meaning from the idea of causality is like deriving color from a shadow; impossible and absurd.

He persists, though, in attacking those imagining a world devoid of volition. He views this covenant of the “unfreedom of will” as a refuge from reality, an illusion that allows those enthralled to shirk responsibility for their actions:  the self can not be to blame in a world where the self has no will to bear. Nietzsche flirts with the paradox of choice: the simultaneous desire of choice and dislike of decision. It is this burden that those professing unfree will hide from. He views the fantasy of not wanting to be ”answerable for anything” as an exercise of the weak will. And though Nietzsche rejects a world in which free or unfree will exist (he admits only the existence of strong and weak wills), he condemns those who evade the responsibility that free will carries as acting out of an ”inward self-contempt.”

Cultural Free Will
------------------
The the notion of free will is central not only to Christianity's notion of original sin, but also to the existentialist's life of purposeful action. Generally speaking, the concept of free will is central and axiomatic in any culture with some morality. And though Nietzsche may question morality all together, the ability to choose is crucial to any characterization of an action as good or bad.

A Resolution
------------

There exist two possibilities: either humans maintain free will, or they do not. Though it is the _idea_ of free will that is the true crux of the issue.

## With

With free will we have responsibility for our actions and our actions can also provide meaning to our lives. We can think and act as though we have control over these actions, because we do.

## Without

Lack of free will presents a more nuanced case. Though we maitain that the notions of cause and effect, even if fictional, are practical. Whether, philosophically, we have or lack free will, we have at least the illusion, and Nietzsche implicitly admits as much. It is analagous to Christian faith: God is omniscient and omnipotent, but doctrine acknowledges the idea of free will granted to humans in the face of this apparent determinism. The freedom of will may not be the supernatural reality but it is the reality of this world.

Regardless of whether we view cause and effect as "useful conventional fictions," such "fictions" still constitute our reality, a reality that not only allows for but suggests the _idea_ of free will.

The illusion of will, whether the concession of a supernatural being or the rationalization of an illusion allows you to act as though you do have such control.

[^1]: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/4363/4363-h/4363-h.htm
