---
layout: post
title: "Reading Fast and Slow"
subtitle: "An effort to eliminate inconsistency by taking small steps"
author: "Royce Branning"
date: 2015-01-26
categories: rbfasho
inprogress: false
---
High level overview: It took me more than a year to read the book Thinking Fast and Slow. I had proper motivation. I enjoyed the book. And when I could bring myself to do it, I generally enjoyed reading. But taking action in situations that aren't completely ideal is hard. I wanted to read 100 pages in a day where I just sat on a chair and cranked it out. I wanted to enjoy every moment of it and I wanted to glean new insights every second. The sun would be shining through my window, I wouldn't be interrupted by my phone, and I would be perfectly comfortable while doing so. However, when the sun shines its hard to sit inside, I'm terribly inflexible so I can hardly ever sit/stand/lay down in the same position for more than 30 minutes without having to switch things up, and I'm a member of the generation that by in large is psychologically incapable of resisting the urge to check, and inevitably be distracted by, our cellular devices---See I am aware of these issues. I'm aware that I want the ideal scenario to perform a task and I'm also aware that it won't actually happen. But I rarely spend the concious effort to connect the two and draw the logical conclusion that if I really want to read a book, build an app, or post an article I have to become comfortable with uncomfortability. Before you let that widely applicable sentence travel to how it can apply to other situations I want to define what I mean by it. 

There are three approaches that come to mind immediately when I think of finding comfortability amongst uncomfortable situations. The first is grinding, the second faith and the third is gradation. I'm going to talk about gradation (or at least what I mean by gradation) first, because I think it might be the most seamless way to breakdown barriers to the inconsistency that I experience in my day to day life. Simply put, its taking small steps. My dad always says "Small things done consistently over time lead to big things". I think that pretty much sums it up. An example I recently read in "creative confidence" by the kelley brothers relates this sort of small chunks approach to how a person gets good at video games. This is a parallel I have actually thought of before, but they beat me getting it into print so I feel the need to credit them. Anyways, the idea with the video game is that each level is just a little bit harder, and you get a little bit better, and you only really have to make a little progress in your abilities, but before you know it, your quite good at performing very complex tasks and achieving high octane objectives. I think this is probably the best way to get really good at something, because in my experience this type of seamlessness comes with activities that you can generally enjoy all the way through. Unfortunately, many things that I have deemed are worth being good at and that I'd like to pursue aren't this fluid. They require more activation energy to get done because they aren't always in stride.

Next we have faith. To stay consistent past the point of slight inconvenience, you need to trust the system your working in. Clearly defined objectives and proof that the effort being put in will make progress towards achieving these objectives is ideal, but rarely is it certain, which is why you need to trust in the unknown that lies between doing work up front and reaching a goal. I need to trust that time sacrificed now, will actually be worth more later. With gradation, there isn't much of a gamble. When I am enjoying what I am doing and also progressing towards a goal seamlessly, I don't need to worry so much about how efficiently I'm moving towards the grander objective or, to an extent, whether I am going there at all because theres no loss involved in the "work" that I am putting in up front. However when that work isn't alltogether perfect, or there are slight inconvienences, my time is now an investment. I am sacrificing present enjoyment for future, enriched enjoyment. So I need to have faith that I'm actually going to get there in order to pay the price up front. 

Lastly we have the grind. I have  faith in the result that will come of my work, but I'm illogical. Grinding is necessary when there is a crossroads of decisions to be made. When the intersection of value occurs between one objective and another. Maybe you are so tired that getting to bed is worth more than pushing a commit on day 36 of a 150 day challenge. (Nick described this intersection to me as the point in which dawn would set off your alarm because the value of daily tasks has overcome that of sleep) You need to not only know how to grind but when. You must pick your spots. Grinding is inconsistent. Every night can't be a 3 am busting your butt night. The grind should be employed as the last hope to stay on track with gradation and hard work as a result of faith. I drink caffeine coffee when I need to grind. I try not to drink it at any other time, because the stimulant, like the mentality is something that you become accustomed too and then loses its magic. 

So my formula for success: try your best to turn anything that you need to do everyday into a video game, take time to really think about the importance of what your doing so that you can apply the proper self-motivation to conquer minor setbacks in stride, and try your best to save your grinding power-up, with the knowledge that when you decide to employ it, its gametime. 
