---
layout: post
title: "Looking Forward is Giving Up"
subtitle: "the vicious cycle of escaping"
author: "Royce Branning"
date: 2015-03-03 
categories: rbfasho
---

You pulled an all nighter on thurday for the test on friday. The dorm party next door kept you from getting a wink of sleep friday night. You promised to do a fundraiser at 7 am on saturday. You deserved a relaxing tv afternoon on saturday, and if you're not social on saturday night then people get offended. Sunday morning 9 am service your working childrens ministries then you go the regular service and of course out to lunch with your fellow church goers. You desperately need a nap. Then some dinner. And now its 7 pm on sunday night. You are beat, and yet to have started on your homework. 70 pages of reading for theology, an hour or two of calculus, reading quiz in physics tomorrow, and you promised your friend/mother/father/sister/brother that you would check out that this or write up that that. So your tired from not sleeping, feeling guilty for letting someone down, and hopeless about the prospect of getting things done in a way that will launch your week off right. Fatigue, guilt, and worry are not the best mindsets to have when approaching a formidable set of tasks. Relax, take a deap breath. It's not that bad, just compose yourself. That's the most important thing right now. Block out the fatigue, forget about the guilt, let the worry melt away. Pull up your newsfeed and see, Sabrina Kinney liked a buzzfeed article about "the top 15 ways that ryan gosling would propose to you", should be a good read...ooo what about closetclicks, any new users, wonder where this girl is from, are we going viral? better check analytics...I just need to break from the action and recoup, one 20 min episode of the office to let my mind free up and I'll be back at it. Great, it's 10pm; I'm done, all the consistent hard work of the last 3 weeks and I just threw it all away. I'm officially behind, and I'm not in any position to catch up. Bad mindset, I need to rev up, clear my head, get back on track...20 minute nap and I'll be refreshed and ready to go...

I had trouble with being consistent this week. I fell into procrastination traps left and right. But I don't think they in and of themselves are why I did. I think I may have come upon the root of the problem for me. Looking forward. People say all the time "you need something to look forward to". A natural pattern of life for a lot of people is: I do work mon-fri then I get to enjoy life sat-sun. I grit my teeth through the things that allow me to enjoy myself. There are bits and pieces of enjoyment mon-fri, maybe a good grade on a test or closing a deal brings a bit of joy but it is a pretty standard idea that we work 70 percent of the time so we can enjoy 30 percent of the time. I'm familiar with delayed gratification and I know gritting your teeth and working hard through the things in life that aren't "fun" is part of life. But as I look at my current state in life and think about how I shape my life I'm not sure I want to follow this model. 

This last week I was thinking about going home for spring break. I was excited by the prospect of not having any assigned work or distinct responsibilities. And this is the mindset that sent me into a downward spiral. Because the previous 5 weeks of the semester I had made a concious effort and succeeded in not considering my schooling as work, but as a part of my life I enjoyed. Taking time to consider the benefits I was receiving from each assignment and how they fit into my larger goals gave them extended value and understanding that diligent reading would enrich lectures made the reading and the lectures actively enjoyable. And after finishing an assignment I felt accomplished on top of informed. But the important thing was that I was reading to finish, or studying hard to get away with a grade on the test that was better than my actual understanding. I was rolling, but then I thought about spring break. And old habits flooded into my life. I began entering "make it through" mode. I tried to pull a fast one on my physics test (it didnt work) and I'm happy about that, retrospectively, I don't want my lazy self to be rewarded for not understanding the content. 

Basically thinking about how at the end of the week I'd be able to go home and see family and relax, which in and of itself is not a bad thing to look forward to, warped my view of the present. It made me value my future prospects more than my current ones. When in reality each moment offers distinct opportunities which should be met with equal excitement. Obviously this is idealistic but if I'm living in the present, it serves me well to be stoked about whatever I have deemed is best to do at the given moment. 

How I should have looked at the situation: *Thought about spring break emerges* It's going to be really great to have time to spend with the family, as well as time to step out of my cycle at school to evaluate the direction I'm taking my life. It will be very nice when it comes, but right now I get to enjoy furthering my knowledge in physics, calculus, theology, and programming in their respective time allotments that I've given them at school...That may seem systematic but I really don't think that should be very hard. After all, I'm excited to be learning these things in school, sometimes that requires effort, but effort isn't the barrier, I think the distinction between putting in effort and doing work might help reframe the idea. Work has negative connotations, it doesn't have to, but often it does and I think applying effort to a is hard but not necessarilly unenjoyable.


There is a time and place for looking ahead and planning for the future, but I don't want to submerge my current self in the future. Right now I should be in the present. If at the present I allot time to exploring the future for purposes of enriching my present ability to work, that is great. But putting myself into the future to escape is destructive. 