---
layout: post
title: "Reading Fast and Slow"
subtitle: "An effort to eliminate inconsistency by taking small steps"
author: "Royce Branning"
date: 2015-01-26
categories: rbfasho
---
High level overview: It took me more than a year to read the book Thinking Fast and Slow. I had proper motivation. I enjoyed the book. And when I could bring myself to do it, I generally enjoyed reading. But taking action in situations that aren't completely ideal is hard. I wanted to read 100 pages in a day where I just sat on a chair and cranked it out. I wanted to enjoy every moment of it and I wanted to glean new insights every second. The sun would be shining through my window, I wouldn't be interrupted by my phone, and I would be perfectly comfortable while doing so. However, when the sun shines its hard to sit inside, I'm terribly inflexible so I can hardly ever sit/stand/lay down in the same position for more than 30 minutes without having to switch things up, and I'm a member of the generation that by in large is psychologically incapable of resisting the urge to check, and inevitably be distracted by, our cellular devices---See I am aware of these issues. I'm aware that I want the ideal scenario to perform a task and I'm also aware that it won't actually happen. But I rarely spend the concious effort to connect the two and draw the logical conclusion that if I really want to read a book, build an app, or post an article I have to become comfortable with uncomfortability. Before you let that widely applicable sentence travel to how it can apply to other situations I want to define what I mean by it. But that will come later. And when I post next you'll understand why. Until then, this is just an idea undergoing formation.